DIY Thimble
===========

Over the past couple weeks, my schedule has had a higher than usual
concentration of the kind of meetings where one sits off-camera and listens to
a presenter talk. Like many engineers who knit in meetings, I find that keeping
my hands busy helps me focus. Knitting puts me on the losing side of a battle
between "don't drop any stitches" and the laws of physics, however, so instead
I've been hand sewing quite a bit. 

.. more::

I've been aware for some time that sewing with a thimble is Objectively Better
than sewing without, but I somehow made it to adulthood without learning to use
a thimble properly, let alone avoid losing one between setting a project down
one month and picking it up again the next. I have DIY'd a lot of various
leather thimbles over the years to try to sew with them, but the designs have
been a hassle to assemble, unusable, or both. However, I have finally stumbled
across a design that doesn't fail or annoy me in the ways that all the previous
ones did. 

It's embarrassingly easy to make. By embarrassingly, I mean "why didn't I
figure this out decades ago?!" All you need is some surgical tape, and a piece
of leather about as wide as your finger and long enough to wrap over your
fingertip. 

.. image:: step0.png

1. Wrap your finger in a couple layers of surgical tape, sticky side out. You
want it tight enough to not fall off too easily, but loose enough to slip on
and off later. 

.. image:: step1.png

2. Put the piece of leather onto your finger over the tape, so it covers the
spot you keep accidentally jabbing with the needle when you fail to use a
thimble. 

.. image:: step2.png

3. Wrap the whole thing with a couple layers of surgical tape, sticky side in. 

.. image:: step3.png

That's literally all there is to it. If you don't like using leather, cardboard
might work, or any plastic that's flexible but sturdy enough to be hard to jab
a needle through. 

The one of these that I made earlier in the week and have been using ever since
has molded to the shape of my finger and only gotten more comfortable over
time. 

.. image:: oldnew.png

P.S. That's a heavy silk jacquard, pretty on both sides, 28" wide without good
selvedges but `they
<https://www.fabric.com/buy/0795939/100-silk-jacquard-double-face-medium-blue-orange>`_
currently have it on Please Go Away sale for $3.13/yard. The fibers burn and
smell like silk, and it feels like silk, so I don't think they're lying about
the composition. The selvedges aren't too nice, one side is fuzzy and the other
seems to have just been cut, but for a price like that I can't complain. The
orange is more coppery in natural light than the photos make it look on my
monitor. 


.. author:: E. Dunham
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: none
.. comments::
