Scale13x Retrospective
======================

This year I had the pleasure of attending and speaking at the Southern
California Linux Expo. Here's what I observed about the location, the
conference's organization, and my own talk.

.. more::

LA logistics
------------

Gettting a room in the same hotel as the conference was, as always, an
excellent choice. I booked about 3 weeks before the conference with no
trouble, but a coworker who tried to book only a week before was redirected to
the Mariott next door because the Hilton was full. 

The Los Angeles Airpot Hilton is in something of a food desert. Within walking
distance there are a Burger King, a Carl's Jr, and a Denny's. The hotel
contains a Starbucks, a sit-down restaraunt, and a bar, though the prices are
2 to 3 times what one would consider reasonable outside the combination of
conference, hotel, and California. My hotel room contained a coffee maker but
no fridge, so I was glad to have brought along non-perishable breakfast and
snack foods. All of the fast food joints nearby make a pretty decent attempt
at offering salads, non-deep-fried chicken, and other staples of my
apathetically health-conscious dietary preferences. 

The Conference
--------------

The registration process was not immediately obvious, and the self-checkin
kiosks demanded the exact email address and zip code with which one registered
for the conference. The line for getting badges and bags after checkin seemed
to go quite fast, though. 

The expo hall spilled into the smaller rooms across from the hotel's main
ballroom as well as out into the hallways, which made it feel almost like two
separate halls. The dense population and energy of the expo floor felt similar
to OSCON, but SCALE's booths were predominantly actual open-source projects
and companies which contribute back upstream, rather than big-name sponsors
looking solely to hire. The larger booths, such as HP, were arranged to take
several consecutive spaces in an aisle rather than to stand as their own
little islands like OSCON's biggest sponsors tend to. 

The conference organizers were extremely friendly and helpful, which created a
welcoming and friendly atmosphere. I felt that if an incident involving
misconduct or bad judgement had happened to occur among attendees, the
organizers would have been able to handle it immeditaely and effectively.
There was almost always at least one organizer hanging out in the speaker
lounge, often their affable publicist Larry Cafiero, to assist speakers and
anwer any questions. This made it easy to get help with problems small enough
not to warrant seeking out or interrupting a busier organizer, but large
enough to be annoying if left unsolved. 

The rooms were often packed to capacity -- I think that there were more people
in attendance than the venue was designed to comfortably hold. I doubt that
all of the attendees would have fit into even the largest room at once;
keynotes were standing room only and relatively early in the morning. 

Despite the room size constraints, the layout of the conference was generally
good. All of the presentation rooms were centrally located on the second floor
and the expo hall was on the ground floor, so it never took more than 2 or 3
minutes to get from one room to another. 

My Talk
-------

I had completely rewritten my Human Hacking talk since I gave it at SeaGL, and
ironically several of the strengths that I saw in its previous incarnation
became weaknesses here. However, the weaknesses from SeaGL became strengths at
SCALE as well. 

The good: 

* Organization at the slide-order level was much better.

* Putting more work into my slides meant I had greater trust that they
  contained all of the important information, and caused me to take fewer
  tangents.

* Extra rehersals of the talk helped me excise most of the anecdotes, keeping
  only those that were directly relevant to the content. This slight narrowing
  of scope gave me more time to repeat key points.

* I made the audience laugh, and people remained engaged throughout the
  presentation.

* The little `Q&A app`_ which Lucy Wyman helped me throw together the day
  before functioned flawlessly for my interactive demo. And the demo actually
  did what I expected this time, unlike the ones at SeaGL which got the
  opposite of the effects I'd hoped for.

* My laptop's VGA output Just Worked with the projectors. Nothing in the stack
  of web browser, window manager, operating system, hardware, cables, and
  projectors decided to spontaneoulsy quit while I was talking.

The bad: 

* I spoke in the keynote room to an audience of about 40 people (surprisingly
  large for 3pm on the last day of the conference), and let myself get quite
  nervous. This caused me to regress back to using a variety of annoying
  speech habits which I've been making an effort to eliminate.

* I was unprepared for the wierd acoustics of the stage (another function of
  room size). The speakers were in the corners of the room and I was in the
  middle with a wireless mic, and I experienced perhaps half a second of delay
  between saying a word and hearing it over the sound system. Before my next
  talk I'm going to find a way to simulate that effect, and practice with it
  occurring, because I found it quite distracting and it's probably common in
  similar audio setups. 

* Due to last-minute advice about potential network problems and admonitions
  to use a local copy of my slides, I presented off their second-to-last
  version since it was the most recent that I had built on my laptop. It had
  inconsistent capitalization in the slide titles and the wrong URL on the
  first and last slides.

* My transitions between individual slides, and organization of ideas within
  each slide's topic, were less polished than at SeaGL. This has taught me
  that the quality of my transitions depends on planning them ahead of time
  and leaving myself plenty of notes, no matter how often I practice a talk. 

On the whole, I think that my talk was quite successful, and I get the
impression (from body language and watching some people taking notes) that
most members of the audience enjoyed at least some parts of the
information-packed hour. I'm not particularly looking forward to watching the
recordings, because I'm well aware of the verbal bad habits (such as filler
words) that I engaged in, but it'll help me target my speaking practice to
avoid such problems at future conferences.  

.. _Q&A: https://github.com/edunham/Q-n-A
.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: conferences 
.. comments::
