2 weeks at Mozilla
==================

On April 16th, I threw an application toward `this job posting
<https://web.archive.org/web/20150316234909/https://careers.mozilla.org/en-US/position/oymA0fwe>`_
on careers.mozilla.org. I doubted whether I'd be qualified, but I reminded
myself that most people apply to jobs where they meet only 80% of the
critiera. I could, with some creative redefinition ("of course an internship
at Intel is a year of relevant experience!"), meet every listed criterion. So
I applied, since the worst they could say was no. 

.. more::

The recruiter replied to my application only 3 hours after I submitted it.
This was certainly an improvement since the 6 months of ultimately fruitless
bureaucratic limbo when I applied for a Mozilla internship a few years ago! 

On April 20th, I had a quick phone chat with my recruiter. It was totally
non-tecnical, and I summarized it to my friends afterward as "Did you read
your own resume? Did you read the job description? Ok, cool!". I'm sure they
were screening for other stuff as well, perhaps basic social skills and an
acceptable level of fluency in spoken English, but that screen was not nearly
as scary as I'd been prepared for. 

My first techncial phone screen was on 4/22. A second recruiter organized the
details of the call, and I talked with Brian Anderson about my background and
the Rust programming language's DevOps needs. He was particularly interested
in my work with Chef and Jenkins in production at my Urban Airship job. After
this phone screen, the title on the job posting got changed from "Operations
Engineer" to "DevOps Engineer". 

On 4/24, I talked with Lars Bergstrom about the Servo project's needs.
Learning about the place that project was at compared to Rust started giving
me some perspective into the similarities between the DevOps Engineer role and
my work juggling systems administration for a variety of open source projects
at the OSU Open Source Lab. 

My final phone screen was with Jack Moffitt, on 4/29. This conversation was
less a review of my experiences and more a brainstorming session about
techniques for speeding up the run time of Rust's continuous integration
tests. Although I wasn't familiar with the specific scenario yet, I was able
to apply my knowledge of CI and Git techniques to propose some possible
solutions that the team hadn't considered yet. 

I interviewd on-site at Mozilla's San Francisco office on May 4th. My day was
scheduled from 10am to 3pm, and I spoke with 5 different Mozilians from
various teams. 

Two interviews were with managers higher up in Mozilla Research's
organizational hierarchy. One was very concerned about community and avoiding
the problems of "not invented here", and felt unfamiliar with most "DevOps"
related terminology. In that interview, I drew pictures on the whiteboard to
explain the similarities between public and private clouds, and we talked a
lot about open source community. The other manager wasn't hesitant to air her
concerns about my relative lack of corporate experience, which gave me a
chance to explain how 

.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: none
.. comments::
