A Linux Sysadmin at MacITConf
=============================

Through a mildly convoluted series of events* on rather short notice, I've
found myself in a rather uncharacteristic location: The `MacIT`_ conference in
Santa Clara, California. For one thing, I don't often get the time to attend
conferences at which I'm not speaking, and for another I have always been and
will remain an outspoken proponent of choosing free and open solutions over
proprietary ones wherever possible. Here are some of my assorted observations
from the event. 

.. more::

The Attendees
-------------

I've made a personal game of seeing how many unique variations I can craft on
the theme "Why are you here?". Honestly, I'm still a little surprised every
time my mentions of work on the Rust programming language or at the OSU Open
Source Lab are met with polite non-comprehension rather than the excitement
about them that I share with most of my peers at open source themed
conferences. 

The tone of the keynotes taken as a whole painted an interesting picture of
the speakers' expectations about their listeners. There's a massive focus on
MDM (multi-device management), perhaps because it's offered by a thriving
ecosystem of competing paid services. The difference that stuck out most to me
was the apparent expected lack of concern for security -- for instance, the
talk on CrashPlan didn't even mention their encryption techniques for keeping
data safe in "the cloud" until I asked a question specifically about it at the
end. Maybe it's because one isn't expected to listen by attempting to reinvent
the tool in one's head, here? I guess a good Silicon-Valley-As-A-Service
consumer would just trust vendors' claims (because Apple would never lie to
us!), rather than questioning everything. 


The Atmosphere
--------------

There's this sense of helplessness which seems totally alien to me, but must
be relatively normal in communities with such strong proprietary vendor
lock-in. The first day's welcome keynote, despite beingpresented by a
thoroughly capable-seeming analyst, was shot through with the sentiment of "We
don't know what Apple will bring us this Fall; we'll just have to wait and
see". 

The audience was asked not to tweet or blog about the technical content
discussed in the second keynote, since it was by a current Apple employee
discussing their plans for the near future, but the tone was one of "We are
Apple, and we have saved you. Here is the solution you need -- we know you
need exactly this solution right now, because we are Apple and you are our
Users". 

If you're particularly curious about the details, Apple will disclose them in
due time, and I'd speculate that some hilarious, "impossible" misuses will
show up at security conferences shortly afterward. 

Relatedly, their idea of "technical" content seems surprisingly conceptual and
high-level. Maybe it's the same at all conferences and I just derive the
technical lessons I learn at FOSS conferences from the hallway track, but 



The Booths
----------

There aren't stickers. Wat? There are some cool and useful higher-end handouts,
like a tiny folding 4-way USB splitter (though it's regular old USB 2.0, not
that fancy port that the new Macs only have one of), but the culture of
sticker-covered laptops just doesn't seem to be a thing around here. 

I also got to pursue my hobby of gently trolling non-technical salespeople
with perfectly valid questions to assess whether the product touted by their
booth is a good fit for my organization. I asked the data recovery tool
marketing lady "So, my intern DBAN'd the wrong drive. Can you help?" and she
nodded, smiled vapidly, and assured me that all I'd have to do was plug in
their magic disk. I then pointed out that DBAN is military-grade disk wiping
technolgoy, and she said I might have to send it in to their clean room to get
looked at by the technicians, but they could recover the data. Am I a jerk?
Kinda. But spending the day in a kiddie pool full of one of my less preferred
flavors of koolaid was stressing me out, and it's healthy to relieve stress
through outlets which don't involve alcohol. 



The Tech
--------

I'm carrying one each of the 2 Thinkpads and 3 Android phones which appear to
be in attendance. I kind of wish whoever's running the network would publish
stats on the devices connected, but I guess that's more of a HOPE or DEFCON
kind of thing to do. 

Useful Takeaways
----------------

I've talked to some other rent-a-mac type customers, and they agree that
Macstadium is effectively the only professional option at present. When I
asked the guys there 















\* The Servo project's Mac hosting provider, MacStadium, was given some free
tickets for sponsoring the conference. They offered a ticket to one of my
colleagues on the server team a couple weeks ago, and since he was unable to
attend he offered it to me. 

.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: none
.. comments::
