On Fear of Speaking at Conferences
==================================

As part of helping organize `SeaGL`_, I'm holding `office hours`_ in IRC along
with a few other organizers to help prospective speakers polish their
submissions to the conference. Here are a few pieces of advice that I've
figured out in the process of getting a `bunch of talks`_ accepted at various
conferences. 

I brain-dumped all this content into here because I sometimes get
unnecessarily anxious about preparing for all eventualities before trying new
things, and I've found similar guides (often on WikiHow) to be helpful for
reassuring me that I actually know what's going on.

.. more::

How to deal with fears about speaking at a conference
-----------------------------------------------------

If you're anything like me, you're going to be afraid. Afriad your talk will
get rejected, afraid your ideas aren't good enough, afraid you'll get accepted
and then disappoint the audience. I won't tell you to get rid of that fear --
for me, it's a powerful motivator to put extra effort into preventing those
scary outcomes. 

A technique that I've found to work pretty well on my own fears about public
speaking is also how I tackle overwhelming technical problems: Break them down
into their component parts. I sometimes write down a series of questions and
answers, much like one-person `rubber duckie debugging`_:  

    I'm scared of submitting a talk. 

What are you scared will happen if you submit a talk?

    I'm scared that it won't get accepted. 

Is that actually bad? You won't be publicly embarrassed, because the
conference committee wants to see you succeed and won't ever say mean things
to or about you. And if your talk idea wouldn't be a good fit for this
conference's audience, the committee just saved you the very embarrassing hour
that would result if it got selected!

    I'm scared that it *will* get accepted, and then I'll have to talk to
    people.

If your talk gets accepted, that's because the conference organizers think the
thing you described in your abstract will be relevant to the audience's
interests. If you provide the answers to the questions your abstract posed and
the audience *doesn't* like it, it's either their fault for choosing to attend
a session that wasn't relevant to them, or the selection committe's fault for
picking a talk on the wrong topic. 

    I'm scared that my talk will get accepted, and sound so cool that
    EVERYBODY shows up!

As long as your talk delivers on the promises in your abstract, everybody who
picked it because it sounded relevant to their interests will be happy to have
heard it! 


Storytime: What if my slides are terrible?
------------------------------------------

This one time at LinuxFest Northwest, I screwed up by not finishing one of my
3 talks till minutes before I went onstage, and not rehearsing it at all.  I
hadn't even proofed my slides -- some of the images were not showing up, and
those images were charts and graphs essential to what I was teaching!  It was
awkward and I felt like I'd really done a disservice to those who showed up to
learn, but freaking out or running away wouldn't make anything better. 

I pulled up the images from my laptop, joked about how leaving things to the
last minute is a terrible idea, and taught the information that my talk
abstract had promised despite the "technical difficulties" imposed by my own
poor preparation.

I gave a talk with terrible slides, and it was awkward and unfun, but I'm
still here and have suffered no lasting damage to my person or reputation from
it. Even if you give a talk with terrible slides, everything will be okay.


Storytime: What if nobody shows up?
-----------------------------------

This one time at OpenWest, my talk got scheduled late in the last day and was
at the same time as another popular talk. I had a great big room and only 3 or
4 people showed up. I waited 5 extra minutes for any stragglers (I would've
waited up to 10 if it had been immediately after lunch or a break) then went
ahead with my talk. Only 1 audience member was visibly asleep, 2 were glued to
their laptops, and one made a point of making eye contact, nodding, and
smiling at me. 

(As an aside, people who practice active listening like that in
conference talks are few and far between, and also AMAZING. Be that person,
and the speakers whose talks you participate in will deeply appreciate you,
even if they don't get the chance to catch up with you later and say so). 

I gave the talk anyways like I'd practiced; I sent the recording to my friends
and family and they were all happy and proud, and I'm still here. I had a talk
where nobody showed up, and I suffered no lasting damage to my person or
reputation. Even if you give a talk where nobody shows up, everything will be
okay. 

Storytime: What if EVERYBODY shows up?
--------------------------------------

This one time at SCALE, my friend and colleague `Elijah Caine`_ was giving an
intro to Blender3D tutorial, and had only been assigned a small room. Well,
about twice as many people showed up as the room was meant to hold. 

People in the room dragged in more chairs from the mosty-empty plenary room
across the hall; some people stood in the back; Eli spoke a bit louder so
everybody could hear. I'd imagine that it was a little terrifying to present
in front of an unexpectedly large group, but Eli suffered no lasting damage to
his person or reputation as a result of it. Even if you give a talk where
EVERYBODY shows up, things will be okay. 

What if nobody asks questions?
------------------------------

If your talk is structured in a way that expects a lot of audience
participation, it can be awkward when you get a super quiet room. One solution
is to have a friend planted in the audience to start the questions off. If you
get accepted to SeaGL and don't have a friend available during your session to
helpfully ask questions, contact me directly and I'll personally arrange to
have a nice human in your talk to ask you things. I can't promise it'll be me,
but I can promise that one of my many friends will be both available and
bribe-able with cookies to help out.

What if everybody asks hard questions?
--------------------------------------

Remember that it's okay to say "I don't know". It's also okay to say "That was
out of scope for what I was working on", or "I'm not sure if I understand what
you're asking, could you rephrase your question?", or "I'm sorry but we're
just about out of time". 


If you just talked about your cool project to solve problem X, and an audience
member points out that there's already an existing tool to solve problem X
better, you can answer with "I researched it but the documentation
suggested it wouldn't work because _____" if you knew about it or "Wow, I
searched for a lot of related things but have never heard of it; I'll check it
out and help them improve their publicity" if that's the case. 

Why do those sound like such respectable, competent, professional answers?
Because if their assumptions (assuming you researched alternatives before
building a thing) are true, you show signs of being a respectable, competent,
professional technologist. There's so much time between now and SeaGL that you
can channel some of your extra nervousness into making sure you've done a
little bit of research on your topic, in order to anticipate those questions
and be able to confidently state either that you've heard of an alternative or
that its SEO was bad. 

Bonus: "I looked at that tool, but its documentation was incomprehensible and
its community seemed really scary" is also a valid reason not to have used a
given thing.

What if my slides are bad?
--------------------------

There are several ways that slides can be bad, all of which have simple and
formulaic solutions: 

* Poorly timed slides can be addressed by practicing with them a few times, so
  you know what content appears when.

* Illegible slides can be addressed by setting your laptop across the room and
  going through your presentation trying to read the smallest print on them.
  Keep your designs high-contrast, since projectors tend to fail at displaying
  accurate colors. Keep your fonts utilitarian, images large, and text to a
  minimum. Label the axes of any graphs, and don't rely solely on color to
  differentiate one line from another. 

* Poorly rendered or un-display-able slides can happen if the machine with
  the only copy of your slides in some fancy proprietary format refuses to
  talk to the projector for any reason. The solution is twofold: Back up your
  slides a lot, and make them easy to display from any computer. HTML and PDF
  are pretty universal formats to address the latter problem; sticking your
  slides on a public web site or GitHub repository with an easily memorized
  URL is an easy fix for the former. 

* Live demos... will always break hilariously in some way or another. If you
  don't mind dealing with everything being unexpectedly broken in front of a
  room full of people, go for it -- it's often quite entertaining for the
  audience. If you do mind, then figure out a way to eliminate the live demo,
  or at least make it optional. One good backup plan is to prepare a video of
  the demo and store it on a USB stick (because conference wifi will fail at
  the worst possible time). 

* A confusing presentation can be prevented by showing a friend your abstract,
  telling them the expected experience level of an audience member, then
  presenting your talk to them. If you feel like you don't have any friends
  you can ask for this kind of help, contact me and as long as it's more than
  a week before the conference, I'll find a time to have a video call where
  you go through your presentation and I tell you what's confusing. 

What if people don't like me and are mean?
------------------------------------------

If anybody violates SeaGL's `anti-harrassment policy`_, or is generally a jerk
in a way that makes the conference a bad experience for you, contact the
organizers and we'll figure out what we can do to keep it from happening
again. For what it's worth, I look kind of funny and talk kind of funny and
yet nobody's ever been a jerk to me for my talks, online or off.


But I don't know what to do!
----------------------------

First, come to `office hours`_ on IRC and we'll help you pick a topic or three
to talk about. We can chat about what you'd like to say, what kind of title
would draw the audience who'd be most interested in it, and of course write
your road map down in an abstract. 

Then you'll click the link on SeaGL's CFP page, create an account in OSEM (our
open-source tool for managing proposals), and submit your talk idea. After
that, all you have to do is wait! 

Behind the scenes, we organizers will run around frantically planning and
organizing and calculating and balancing and generally figuring out what
lineup of talks we think would work best. We'll get back to you a month or two
after the CFP closes with the news of whether or not your talk was accepted. 

If your talk is selected, you should figure out how you're getting to SeaGL
and where you're staying, if you aren't local to the area. Even if you're
local, make sure you're still free during the time slot when your talk got
scheduled, and ideally at least an hour before and after. 

Then you'll make some slides to go with your talk. I like to do this by
expanding on and illustrating the topics I discussed in my abstract, and
answering any questions that it posed, but your process for putting together a
presentation will probably be as unique as your talk is. 

As the day of the conference gets closer, you'll practice your talk for
friends or family or your teddy bear or some random stranger in a chatroom.
You can change it based on their feedback, or choose not to -- the important
part is getting comfortable that you know what your slides say and how long
your content takes to present, so you don't end up finishing too soon or
having to rush. It's generally a good idea to leave about 10 minutes for
questions, though some types of talk (like a panel discussion) may need more
than that. 

If you're planning to record your talk from your own laptop, make sure the
tool you'll use is installed and configured correctly. Bonus: If you record
while you're practicing your talk, you can listen to it and work on correcting
any problems that you identify.

On the day of the conference, you'll arrive at the venue and make sure you
know where the room is. If there's a bit of free time earlier in the day than
your talk, it's a good idea to see whether your laptop is capable of talking
to the projectors at the venue. If it isn't, this gives you time to come up
with a backup plan (like projecting from someone else's computer). 

10 minutes before your talk, you'll double-check your schedule to make sure
you're at the right room, then connect your computer to the projector to get
your first slide on the screen so the audience knows they're in the right
place too. Your volunteer room monitor will introduce themself, and you might
ask them to give you 5-minute and 1-minute reminders before your time is up so
that you finish speaking in time to let the audience ask questions. If you're
recording your talk from your laptop, you'll start doing that just the way you
tested. 

1 or 2 minutes before your talk, you'll pace around awkwardly while checking
the time as the latecomers of your audience wander in and find seats. You
might check your microphone, if you're using one, and ask everyone to move
toward the center of their rows to fill empty seats if the room is getting
crowded. 

At the start of your talk, you'll introduce yourself and your topic. Remind
people what to expect from the next hour. It's helpful to tell the audience
whether you'd prefer they interrupt you with questions, or save them till the
end. Then you'll go through the body of your presentation, just like you
practiced. 

10 minutes before the end of your allocated time, you'll wrap up with an extra
repetition of the key points of what you just discussed, then ask the audience
for questions. They'll ask you a variety of things, and you'll respond to the
best of your knowledge just like how you would if a friend or colleague was
asking you. 

When your time is up, you'll pack up your laptop and anything else you brought
for your talk, then step out into the hall to let the next presenter set up
and continue chatting with the group of audience members who were particularly
interested and want to know more. 


.. _anti-harrassment policy: http://seagl.org/code_of_conduct.html
.. _bunch of talks: http://edunham.net/pages/talks.html
.. _SeaGL: http://seagl.org/
.. _office hours: http://seagl.org/news/2015/07/15/IRC.html
.. _rubber duckie debugging: http://duckie.me/
.. _Elijah Caine: http://elijahcaine.me/

.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: none
.. comments::
