pre-resignation
===============

I've been with Mozilla for exactly 6 months as of Thanksgiving 2015, an
anniversary which has inspired me to look back on my work so far.

I've held a variety of tech industry positions throughout my academic career,
as a result of working full time whenever school was out and part-time when it
was in session. However, there's something different about all of those
positions, whose impact I'm only beginning to realize as I have an experience
that it can be contrasted against. 

I started paying attention to this when an OSL full-timer complained on IRC
about how bad students were at communicating when they resigned from their
positions. The reason is obvious, from my perspective: OSL is the first job
from which many of us have ever resigned in a way that was not planned out
since practically the beginning. Furthermore, the standard path through OSL is
also pre-resigned: Work and study 4 years (with breaks for internships), pick
up a diploma, cease being a student employee and begin  being an employee of
one of our many friends. It's agreed from the beginning that getting the
diploma and ceasing to be a student terminates one's eligibility for
employment, and supposed that one will continue working up until that time. So
the standard track through OSL is a pre-resigned position: You know at the
start when it will end. 

The internships for which students often temporarily vacate their OSL roles
are an even more obvious example of pre-resignation: The papers one signs
before starting state the date when the position ends. There's never an "I'm
resigning" conversation; that'd be nonsensical unless there was some extreme
circumstance cutting the internship short. 

A few of us also worked during high school, which in the case of a summer job
is pre-resigned as of the date of school starting, or in the case of a
part-time position, is probably pre-resigned at the beginning of university. 

So when would we have had practice resigning from any job in a way that the
boss didn't know about beforehand? 

Now that I'm my first position that didn't start out looking pre-resigned, I'm
better able to articulate the subtle impacts of this difference. Only after 6
months is it really sinking in that I *don't* have to leave at the end of the
summer, I don't have to go from doing things that matter in the real world to
repeating stupid exercises identical to those of my classmates.

In this context, the long-term planning that I've done in other roles looks
like a bit of a joke. I made my best effort at the time, certainly, but there
are optimizations that it seems more worthwhile to undertake when you're
certain you'll be doing a given task n*10,000 times rather than just n*10 or
n*100. 

 
.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: none
.. comments::
