One free ticket to Rust Camp
============================

Right now, there are 11 tickets being given away by community members to help
`women <https://twitter.com/Carols10cents/status/613701655100530688>`_ and
`minorities <http://graydon2.dreamwidth.org/217152.html>`_ attend `Rust Camp
<http://rustcamp.com/>`_. 

I have one spare ticket, which I got for a friend who ended up having other
commitments on the day of the conference. I would like to give this ticket to
someone who would otherwise be unable to attend Rust Camp, regardless of
whether or not they're a minority. To maximize the amount of impact that all
our free tickets have, I'd ask that anyone qualified for one of `Graydon's
tickets <http://graydon2.dreamwidth.org/217152.html>`_ appeal to him first, so
that the ticket I'm giving away can help someone who wouldn't have another
option to attend. 

I also happen to have a voucher from United Airlines for $500 worth of
flights, so if you could not attend Rust Camp without travel assistance within
that amount, let me know. 

To recap: Are you a Rust community member who couldn't attend without a
sponsored ticket? Are you unable to get another free ticket? Send me an email,
``rustcamp`` at ``edunham.net``. Since I'm relatively new to the community and
don't really know who's who yet, I'd love to see a link or two to your
involvement with Rust -- a blog post, tweet, GitHub project, StackOverflow
question/answer, or anything else. I'll update or take down this post once the
ticket has been claimed. 

.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: none
.. comments::
