Saying Ping
===========

There's an idiom on IRC, and to a lesser extent other more modern
communication media, where people indicate interest in performing a real-time
conversation with someone by saying "ping" to them. This effectively
translates to "I would like to converse with you as soon as you are
available".

The traditional response to "ping" is to reply with "pong". This means "I am
presently available to converse with you".

If the person who pinged is not available at the time that the ping's
recipient replies, what happens? Well, as soon as they see the pong, they
re-ping (either by saying "ping" or sometimes "re-ping" if they are
impersonating a sufficiently complex system to hold some state).

This attempt at communication, like "phone tag", can continue indefinitey in
its default state.

It is an inefficient use of both time and mental overhead, since each missed
"ping" leaves the recipient with a vague curiosity or concern: "I wonder what
the person who pinged wanted to talk to me about...". Additionally, even if
both parties manage to arrange synchronous communication at some point in the
future, there's the very real risk that the initiator may forget why they
originally pinged at all.

There is an extremely simple solution to the inefficiency of waiting until
both parties are online, which is to stick a little metadata about your
question onto the ping. "Ping, could you look issue # xyz?" "Ping, can we chat
about your opinions on power efficiency sometime?". And yet there appears to
be a decent correlation between people I regard as knowing more than I do
about IRC etiquette, and people who issue pings without attaching any context
to them.

If you do this, and happen to read this, could you please explain why to me
sometime?



.. author:: E. Dunham
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: irc
.. comments::
