Gamifying Adulthood with HabitRPG
=================================

After creating an account and abandoning it some time before December 2013
(since I have never yet subscribed and yet had a `Trapper Santa`_ scroll in my
inventory), I have returned to `HabitRPG`_. Here's a quick examination of why
I think I left and then came back. 

.. more:: 

Why Leave?
----------

The short answer is that I never really "got into it". I didn't have a
smartphone when I first created an account in the web UI, and it seemed at the
time like using the app would be prerequisite to successful gameplay. 

When I first got my phone, I installed the app, but I hadn't touched the web
UI in so long that I'd lost track of *why* the game was fun or rewarding. The
app's not super pretty, so when I wasn't motivated to touch it by an
understanding of the bigger-picture gameplay, I didn't choose to. 

Finally, I started playing with the app at a time when I more or less already
had my life under control. I didn't have any recurringly time-wasting habits
cutting into productive work that I was late on, my daily schedule worked out
quite well with room for everything I wanted to get done, and so forth. Such
is the beauty of "grownup" life, with a 9-5 job and not much else going on. At
that point, Ingress was my "I need to touch my phone a lot" game of choice,
and satisfied my vague desire for quantified/gamified reality. 

Why return?
-----------

The game was brought to my attention in passing when I saw a friend playing it
a couple months ago, and its usefulness clicked into place for me when I
observed how much time I was spending on another online game called
`dominus`_. It's an open-source real time strategy type game, and the realtime
aspect of gameplay (as opposed to the immsersive, lose-hours-on-end nature of
my other bad habits like Minecraft) made me realize how easily and
unobtrusively I can fit a 5-minutes-at-a-time game into my workflow.

Now, if only I could turn those little brain breaks into something useful.
That's where HabitRPG fits in.

What It Is:
-----------

You should really go do the tutorial and read `the wiki`_ for any kind of a
comprehensive overview. In a hideously undersized nutshell, HabitRPG is a game
where you get items, gold, XP, and mana points by completeing tasks. Tasks
give you rewards (or harm you when incomplete) differently based on their
type:

* *Habits* are behaviors that you want to get more consistent at. They can
  either be positive, negative, or have both positive and negative buttons.
  Consistently plus-ing a habit turns it slowly green then blue; consistently
  minus-ing it turns it orange then red. Habits stay in your habit list until
  you delete them, no matter how often they're clicked.

    * Positive habits are "good" things and have only a ``+`` button, which you
      click when you do them. For example, "eat a vegetable".
    * Negative habits are things you're trying to avoid doing, and have only a
      ``-`` button. For example, "drinking soda".
    * Some habits have both ``+`` and ``-`` buttons. For example, you might
      put both buttons on "take the stairs instead of the elevator", and click
      on the ``+`` each time you take the stairs and the ``-`` each time you
      take the lift.

* *Dailies* are things that you want to do once every day, or on certain days
  of the week. Various game mechanics hurt you when you fail to complete all
  your daily tasks, or give you advantages when you complete all of them
  (called getting a *perfect day*). Dailies stick around until you delete
  them, and count the streak of how many times in a row you've gotten them.
* *To-dos* are how you quantify all those one-off things that need to get done.
  For instance, "Attend CS class" might be a daily for Monday, Wednesday, and
  Friday, but "Do CS class assignment 1" would be a to-do.

What It's Not
-------------

HabitRPG is not a replacement for Google Calendar. Although recurring "daily"
tasks can be set for certain days of the week, its deadlines feature just
doesn't get in your face the way a calendar email and notification will.

Although I'll discuss the ways that its game mechanics reduce the likelihood
of "do it eventually" tasks getting totally forgotten, I don't find HabitRPG
to match Google Calendar's ability to make me do an important, time-sensitive,
one-off task like attending an appointment.

It's also not your mom. It can't tell if you're lying to it, and makes no
effort to detect or punish "cheating". While this game is a great way to
channel a little bit of self-discipline into a lot of results, it cannot
magically generate discipline and motivation for you if you start out with
zero.

Personal accountability through positive tasks
----------------------------------------------

Part of the fun of this game is the challenge it presents in terms of learning
to hack your own brain. One thing I've noticed is that I have a much easier
time being honest on positive tasks than negative ones. For instance, a habit
of "make a public commit on GitHub" is easy for me to recognize when I've
fulfilled it, and it keeps the experience of using HabitRPG fun -- I'm
motivated to open the site and record the action I took, because a good thing
(XP and gold) will happen when I do. 

Conversely, negative tasks are harder to be accountable for because I know
that nothing good will happen if I bother to go so far out of my way as to
open a HabitRPG tab and wait for it to load, and maybe if I just go do
something else I'll accidentally forget to record it, and... you get the idea.


Good recurrence model
---------------------

Daily tasks fill a niche that Google Calendar and paper checklists can't
handle as well. There are many tasks that need to be done *sometime* every
day, but it doesn't matter exactly when. It's hard to add something to a
calendar without picking a particular time slot in advance (then easy to put
it off till a different day if that time slot gets taken by something
higher-priority). Paper to-do lists are fine for one-off tasks without a set
time, but remembering to check a list every day (motivated only by *fear of
failure*, rather than *hope for reward*) requires more willpower than I usually
have to spare.  

Partying
--------

Getting together with friends to form a party and fight monsters is
delightfully entertaining, and provides an element of reality to the game.
Now, if I skip a daily task, it's not only hurting me but it's harming the
cute little avatars of people I care about as well. 

It's also an incentive against cheating, since it'll be obvious to everyone
you're with if you level too fast. (Though "too fast" is quite relative -- a
min/maxed Rogue between levels 10 and 20, in the hands of a checklist fanatic,
can gain 2 or 3 levels on a productive day.) 

Complexity
----------

One trait of Minecraft which addicted me to the game was its complexity -- a
player who's read the entire wiki and memorized a lot of recipes and facts
about the game can do interesting tricks which amaze less educated players,
and enjoy teaching their friends. I feel like so far, the subtleties of
HabitRPG's game mechanics are hitting a similar sweet spot between being easy
to start and difficult to master. 

Moderation
----------

Sometimes I'll get going on a project or task which makes me feel productive
and then repeat it, when another less-satisfying task is more important to do
at that particular time. Habits in HabitRPG fight this tendency by
implementing a rule of diminishing returns: The more often you've done a
particular habit, the less gold and XP you'll get each time you engage in it.

Notes-To-Self
-------------

I used to jot down ideas of things to try someday in a notebook; then I went
through a phase of jotting them down in a git repository; then upon acquiring
a smartphone I had moderate success with Google Keep. The problem with all of
those media was that my cool ideas would get lost in them -- at times of
boredom, I'd forget that my lists were out there. 

Now, I'm throwing such ideas onto my to-do list in HabitRPG and they gradually
percolate up into being the least onerous challenge available. 

Since HabitRPG is a low-guilt site to check when I'm procrastinating on more
useful things, it tend to remind me of my "that might be neat" ideas right
when I have free cycles to actually do something about them. At the opposite
extreme, Google Tasks puts a little list in my inbox and reminds me of things
to do when I'm trying to compose email, and have the least free time right
then. 

Emergent Task Weighting
-----------------------

I've noticed a tendency to throw the same unpleasant task into my to-do queue
multiple times. or break it down into increasingly longer checklists in order
to procrastinate on actually accomplishing it. In a classic to-do list this
would just cause me to experience more guilt and fear about the task, but in
HabitRPG, it slowly increases the amount of gold and XP that the task will be
worth when I finally get it done and check off all of the associated items. 

Although some perfectionists might consider multiple occurrences of a task in
the to-do list to be cheating, I find that letting them pile up is a powerful
technique for convincing myself to finally get it over with and do the task. 

Improvements
------------

The only tweak that I can think of right now to improve HabitRPG would be to
publish the gold, XP, and mana values for each task's completion on the title
of the task. 

.. _the wiki: http://habitrpg.wikia.com/
.. _dominus: http://www.dominusgame.net/
.. _HabitRPG: http://habitrpg.com/
.. _Trapper Santa: http://habitrpg.wikia.com/wiki/Trapper_Santa

.. author:: default
.. categories:: none
.. tags:: habitrpg
.. comments::
