Opinion: Levels of Safety Online
=================================

The Mozilla All-Hands this week gave me the opportunity to explore an exhibit
about the "Mozilla Worldview" that Mitchell Baker has been working on. The
exhibit sparked some interesting and sometimes heated discussion (as direct
result of my decision to express unpopular-sounding opinions), and helped me
refine **my opinions** on what it means for someone to be "safe" on the
internet.

Spoiler: I think that there are many different levels of safety that someone
can have online, and the most desirable ones are also the most difficult to
attain.

Obligatory disclaimer: These are my opinions. You're welcome to think I'm wrong.
I'd be happy to accept pull requests to this post adding tools for attaining
each level of safety, but if you're convinced I'm wrong, the best place to say
that would be your own blog. Feel free to drop me a link if you do write up
something like that, as I'd enjoy reading it!

.. more::

Safety to Consume Desired Information
-----------------------------------

I believe that the fundamental layer of safety that someone can have online is
to be able to safely **consume information**. Even at this basic level, a lot
of things can go wrong. To safely consume information, people need internet
access. This might mean free public WiFi, or a cell phone data plan.
Safety here means that the user won't come to harm solely as a result of what
they choose to learn. "Desired information" means that the person gets a
chance to find the "best" answer to their question that's available.

How could someone come to harm as a result of choosing to learn something? If
you've ever joked about a particular search getting you "put on a watch list",
I'm sure you can guess. I happen to hold the opinion that knowledge is an
amoral tool, and it's the actions that people take for which they should be
held accountable -- if you believe that there exist facts that are inherently
unethical to know, we'll necessarily differ on the importance of this safety.

How might someone fail to get the information they desired? Imagine someone
searching for the best open source social networking tools on a "free" internet
connection that's provided and monitored by a social networking giant. Do you
think the articles that turn up in their search results would be comparable to
what they'd get on a connection provided by a less biased organization?

Why "desired information", and not "truth"? My reason here is selfish. I enjoy
learning about different viewpoints held by groups who each insist that the
other is completely wrong. If somebody tried to moderate what information is
"true" and what's "false", I would probably only be allowed to access the
propaganda of at most one of those groups.

Sadly, if your ISP is monitoring your internet connection or tampering with
the content you're trying to view, there's not a whole lot that you can do
about it. The usual solution is to relocate -- either physically, or feign
relocation by using an onion router or proxy. By building better tools,
legislation, and localization, it's plausible that we could extend this safety
to almost everyone in the world within our lifetimes.

Safety to Produce Information Anonymously
---------------------------------------

I think the next layer of internet safety that people need is the ability to
**produce information anonymously**. The caveat here is that, of course,
nobody else is obligated to choose to host your content for you. The safety of
hosting providers, especially coupled with their ability to take financial
payment while maintaining user anonymity, is a whole other can of worms.

Why does producing information anonymously come before producing information
with attribution? Consider the types of danger that accompany producing
content online. Attackers often choose their victims based on characteristics
that the victims have in the physical world. Attempted attacks often cause
harm because the attacker could identify the victim's physical location or
social identity. While the best solution would of course be to prevent the
attackers from behaving harmfully at all, a less ambitious but more attainable
project is to simply prevent them from being able to find targets for their
aggression. Imagine an attacker determined to harm all people in a certain
group, on an internet where nobody discloses whether or not they're a member
of that group: The attacker is forced to go for nobody or everybody, neither
of which is as effective as an individually targeted attack. And that's just
for verbal or digital assaults -- it is extremely difficult to threaten or
enact physical harm upon someone whose location you do not know.

Systems that support anonymity and arbitrary account creation open themselves
to attempted abuse, but they also provide people with extremely powerful tools
to avoid being abused. There are of course tradeoffs -- it takes a certain
amount of mental overhead, and might feel duplicitous, to use separate
accounts for discussing your unfashionable polticical views and planning the
local block party -- but there's no denying how much less harm it is possible
to come to when behaving anonymously than when advertising your physical
identity and location.

How do you produce information anonymously? First, you access the internet in
a way that won't make it easy to trace your activity to your house. This could
mean booting from a LiveCD and accessing a public internet connection, or
booting from a LiveCD and using a proxy or onion router to connect to the
sites you wish to access in order to mask your IP address. A LiveCD is safer
than using your day-to-day computer profile because browsers store information
from sites you visit, and some information about your operating system is
sometimes visible to sites you visit. Using a brand-new copy of your operating
system, which forgets everything when you shut down, is an easy way to avoid
revealing those identifying pieces of information.

Proof read anything that you want to post anonymously to make sure it doesn't
contain any details about where you live, or facts that only someone with your
experiences would know.

How do you put information online anonymously? Once you have a connection
that's hard to trace to your real-world self, it's pretty simple to set up
free accounts on mail and web hosting sites under some placeholder name.

Be aware that the vocabulary you use and the way you structure your sentences
can sometimes be identifying, as well. A good way to strip all of the
uniqueness from your writing voice is to run a piece of writing through
http://hemingwayapp.com/ and fix everything that it calls an error. After
that, use a thesaurus to add some words you don't usually use anywhere else.
Alternately, you could run it through a couple different translation tools to
make it sound less like you wrote it.

How do you share something you wrote anonymously with your friends? Here's the
hard part: You don't. If you're not careful, the way that you distribute a
piece of information that you wrote anonymously can make it clear that it came
from you. Anonymously posted information generally has to be shared publicly
or to an entire forum, because to pick and choose exactly which individuals
get to see a piece of content reveals a lot about the identity of the person
posting it.

Doing these things can enable you to produce a piece of information on
the internet that would be a real nuisance to trace back to you in real life.
It's not *impossible*, of course -- there are sneaky tricks like comparing the
times when you use a proxy to the times when material shows up online -- but
someone would only attempt such tricks if they already had a high level of
technical knowledge and a grudge against you in particular.

Long story short, in most places with internet access, it is possible but
inconvenient to exercise your safety to produce information
anonymously. By building better online tools and hosting options, we can
extend this safety to more people who have internet access.

Safety to Produce Information Psuedonymously
------------------------------------------

An important thing to note about producing information anonymously is that if
you step up and take credit for another piece of information you posted,
you're less anonymous. Add another attribution, and you're easier still to
track.  It's most anonymous to produce every piece of information under a
different throwaway identity, and least anonymous to produce everything under
a single identity even if it's made up.

Producing information pseudonymously is when you use a fake name and
biography, but otherwise go about the internet as the same person from day to
day. The technical mechanics of producing a single pseudonymous post are
identical to what I described for acting "anonymously", but I differentiate
psyedonymity from anonymity in that the former is continuous -- you can form
friendships with other humans under a psuedonym.

The major hazard to a pseudonymous online presence is that if you aggregate
enough details about your physical life under a single account, someone
reading all those details might use them to figure out who you are offline.
This is addressed by private forums and boards, which limit the number of
possible attackers who can see your posts, as well as by being careful of what
information you disclose. Beware, however, that any software vulnerability in
a private forum may mean its contents suddenly becomes public.

In my opinion, pseudonymous identity is an excellent compromise between the
social benefits of always being the same person, and physical safety from
hypothetical attackers. I find that behaving pseudonymously rather than
anonymously helps me build friendships with people whom I'm not sure at first
whether to trust, while maintaining a sense of accountability for my
reputation that's absent in strictly anonymous communication. But hey, I'm
biased -- you probably don't know my full name or home address from my web
presence, so I'm on the psuedonymity spectrum too.

Safety to Produce Information with Accurate Attribution
-----------------------------------------------------

The "safety" to produce information with attribution is extremely complex, and
the one on which I believe that most social justice advocates tend to focus
on. It is as it sounds: Will someone come to harm if they choose to post their
opinions and location under their real name?

For some people, this is the easiest safety to acquire: If you're in a group
that's not subject to hate crimes in your area, and your content is only
consumed by people who agree with you or feel neutrally toward your views, you
have this freedom by default.

For others, this safety is almost impossible to obtain. If the combination of
your appearance and the views you're discussing would get you hurt if you said
it in public, extreme social change would be required before you had even a
chance at being comparably safe online.

I hold the opinion that solving the general case of linking created
content to real-world identities is not a computer problem. It's a social
problem, requiring a world in which no person offended by something on the
internet and aware of where its creator lives is physically able to take
action against the content's creator. So it'd be great, but we are not there
yet, and the only fictional worlds I've encountered in which this safety can
be said to exist are impossibly unrealistic, totalitarian dystopias, or both.

In Summary
----------

In other words, I view misuse of the internet as a pattern of the form
"Creator posts content -> attacker views content -> attacker identifies
creator -> attacker harms creator". This chain can break, with varying degrees
of difficulty, at several points:

First, this chain of outcomes won't begin if the creator doesn't post the
content at all. This is the easiest solution, and I point out the "safety to
consume desired content" because even someone who never posts online can
derive major benefits from the information available on the internet. It's
easy, but it's not good enough: Producing as well as consuming content is part
of what sets the internet apart from TV or books.

The next essential link in the chain is the attacker identifying the content's
creator. If someone has no way to contact you physically or digitally, all
they can do is shout nasty things to the world online, and you're free to
either ignore them or shout right back. Having nasty things shouted about your
work isn't optimal, but it is difficult to feel that your physical or social
wellbeing is jeopardized by someone when they have no idea who you are. This
is why I believe that the safety to produce information anonymously is so
important: It uses software to change the outcome even in circumstances where
the attacker's behavior cannot be modified. Perfect psuedonymity also breaks
this link, but any software mishap or accidental over-sharing can invalidate
it instantly. The link is broken with fewer potential points of failure by
creating content anonymously.

The third solution is what I alluded to when discussing the safety of
psuedonymity: Prevent the attacker from viewing the content.
This is what private, interest-specific forums accomplish reasonably well.
There are hazards here, especially if a forum's contents become public
unintentionally, or if a dedicated attacker masquerades as a member of the
very group they wish to harm. So it helps, and can be improved technologically
through proper security practices by forum administrators, and socially via
appropriate moderation. It's better, from the perspective that assuming the
same online identity each day allows creators to build social bonds with one
another, but it's still not optimal.

The fourth and ideal solution is to break the cycle right at the very end, by
preventing the attacker from harming the content creator. This seems to be
where most advocates argue we should jump straight into, because it's really
perfect -- it requires no change or compromise from content creators, and
total change from those who might be out to harm them. It's the only solution
in which people of all appearances and beliefs and locations are equally safe
online. However, it's also the most difficult place to break the cycle, and
a place at which any error of implementation would create the potential for
incalculable abuse.

I've listed these safeties in an order that I regard as how feasible they are
to implement with today's social systems and technologies. I think it's
possible to recognize the 4th safety as the top of the heap, without using
that as an excuse to neglect the benefits which can come from bringing more of
the world its 3 lesser but far more attainable cousins.


.. author:: E. Dunham
.. categories:: opinion
.. tags:: opinion
.. comments::
